---
layout: post
title: Health Research at INESC TEC
category: machine learning
---

Plenty of research investment exists in Portugal. It is truly remarkable how many institutions exists in this country of 10 and a half million, whose income per capita is half that of Germany. Much of this funding comes from the government, with a significant portion from industry as well.

My girlfriend and I both work at INESC TEC. She was until recently paid by EDP Renewables (energy production), while I was paid by European Union funds. We are currently enrolled in a Ph.D. program and are being paid by the national foundation for science (FCT).

In the last couple of months, I visited dozens of research institutions in three cities: Porto, Aveiro and Braga. It is mind boggling the amount of research being done in these cities alone. Only in Porto, the computer science centers I have visited have over 400 researchers in total, probably much more.

Following is the *health-related* research being done in the institute I am currently associated with. Notice this is only some of the health-related research being one. 

## INESC TEC

INESC TEC is the ``Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores, Tecnologia e Ciência'', and is 31 years old. While INESC TEC is not a health institute, much of its research has had a strong impact in health care.

Through the TEC4HEALTH initiative, INESC TEC groups have worked closely with groups from the São João Hospital, and with national players such as the Champalimaud Foundation. Furthermore, its partnership with INEB and IBMC has been consolidated in I3S.

Several units exist within this institute, and are now described.

### CRACS

 CRACS is a big unit with 62 researchers. Its heavy focus has been on languages and distributed computing, security and privacy, and knowledge extraction from data. It is this latter subgroup that has focused mostly on health applications, borrowing some of the technology from the rest of the subgroups.

The unit has a big focus on logic programming, such as the Prolog programming language. In fact, CRACS maintains its own implementation and extension of Prolog called Yap. This extension can be used to produce probabilities and is used for inductive logic programming to create machine learning health models. Health applications of this multidisciplinary project have been in children cardiac diseases, breast cancer, bipolar disorder, and diabetes.

Furthermore, the group has developed the following systems: -- Mammoclass: a web interface for classification of mammograms; -- Expert-bayes: a software tool that can be used by experts to insert expert knowledge into statistical generated induction rules; -- Dataias: a machine learning statistics package.



### LIAAD

LIAAD counts with 57 researchers, and was previously an independent institute, now integrated in INESC TEC.

The main core is decision support, with several subgroups branching from there: data mining, optimization, mathematical sciences, multi-agents, and statistics.

The group has performed research that ranges from theory, such as utility-based learning and deep learning, into practical applications, such as in heart signal analysis, prediction of chronic and acute kidney pain, ECG analysis, and sequence mining.

Big health projects have included RECAP, a personalized patient education and self care delivery platform, and an online learning project for changes detection in depth of anesthesia signals with Santo António Hospital. Also, agent-based modeling is used to model epidemiology ramifications and containment of diseases.




### CTM

CTM is the Centre of Telecommunication and Multimedia. The main subgroup studies multimodal learning using images, reports, questionnaires and other media forms, as well as weakly supervised learning which allows learning from data that has not been manually identified by experts. This is the group I am inserted in.

A long-standing research line has been in breast cancer: biological mechanisms, screening and diagnosis, surgery planning, surgery evaluation, and rehabilitation. Also, there is a biometry subgroup working on non-intrusive biometry identification such as contact-less fingerprints.






### C-BER

The C-BER groups encompasses INESC TEC, INEB, and UTAG. It works exclusively in bio-engineering, biomedical imaging, and neuro-engineering.

In terms of bio-instrumentation, the unit has worked in wearable technology, such as trousers with sensors to help coordination re-rehabilitation. In terms of biomedical imaging, the unit has worked on computer-aided diagnosis, such as in developing a tool for retina, breast and lung vascular biomarkers estimations, 3D videos of EEG-fMRI, and human brain analysis.




### C-SIG

This unit focuses mostly on knowledge extraction and navigation from text. The group has developed the important Chrome Extension to help non-experts search for health information. This system helps users who do not know the medical terms, or do not know how to write them, with expressions to find the health documentation they are looking for.

Furthermore, a system for content simplification and summarization has been built to produce simplified descriptions personalized to users characteristics, so that health information can be adequately understood by most patients. The unit develops search system to help doctors as well, by linking biomedical literature to electronic health records, so that physicians can easily find the appropriate literature for a given patient. Additionally, the system provides diagnosis suggestions based on the list of symptoms and helps deducing the most effective treatment and tests.

The unit also works on epidemiological studies based on searches, in order to track influenza and flu rates, and has analyzed the mental state of cancer patients after diagnosis using social media and wearable sensors.

Moreover, the group has worked on multilingual search, and the role of emotion on document search.
